 guys have any questions at any point just just holler at me and we'll um we'll take them as they come so um archaea um originally thought to be a strange set subset of bacteria uh they were finding them in in extreme environments um usually uh really hot environments like ocean vents um geysers things things like that. And so there are these strange, what they thought were like kind of super bacteria, but then they were able to genetically trace these. And, you know, we've had these incredible advancements in our technology in the last 10 years that have enabled us to DNA sample these organisms and tell that they actually are not bacteria. He talks a little bit about their discovery, Carl Wost and George Fox. He brings up the extremophile thing again, talking about how they can survive in high temperature environments. And they do, you know, some of them, they wanted to classify bacteria and extremophile bacteria as two different types of bacteria. But then when they found that it had a distinct genetic makeup, that was enough for them to come up with a whole new tree of life with three kingdoms, bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes. And so it's believed that the archaea are probably the oldest branch, which I think is really fascinating. And he goes into it quite a bit throughout this whole chapter, as short as it is, about all the different life strategies. We'll get to it, especially like with the carbon cycling and that kind of stuff here in a minute. But the fact that we think these are some of the earliest life forms on the, on earth. And the fact that we see them showing up in these environments where modern scientists have done experiments where they add the right, you know, some salt water from the ocean, the right kind of chemical mix of just chemistry, and then hit it with electricity to simulate like a lightning strike and they're able to start to develop life forms. And so they've been able to replicate a theory that that's a potential source of how life started to manifest on planet Earth. And so it's really interesting to me. Just, you know, we don't know a lot about Archaea, so it's really interesting to me just you know we don't know a lot about archaea but it's really fascinating um the big thing about it is they're they're very difficult to discern from bacteria um they look like bacteria they move like bacteria he talks about um a lot of them are uh flageates. Some form large colonies. Some want to be solo, all like bacteria. They have the same common shapes as bacteria. And so what, you know, what makes them unique? And that's how a dichotomous key works. You know, what's the exclusory question? And so both of them have a cell wall that holds and protects their DNA. The cellular membrane of archaea has lipids while bacterial cell walls don't. And this is pretty technical stuff that we're never going to use in what we, you know, what we're doing day to day. There, there, so there's some cellular level distinctions. There's the, the ability to discern using DNA sequencing, but even with really high magnification, you're not visual visually going to be able to determine if you're looking at archaea or bacteria. Genetically, they're both prokaryotes, and that just means they're genetic materials not in a nucleus. But the genes of archaea, not bacteria, are more closely related to the genes of eukaryotes. And again, I think that's just really interesting on an evolutionary thought process of if these are some of the first organisms on earth and we see them being closely related to eukaryotes as well as some of these different life strategies they have. It's really interesting to think that, yeah, everything could have come from these, you know, very, very simple life forms, which is just fascinating to me. He talks about the different types of archaea. I think it's really interesting, you know, where he talks about what role they play in the carbon cycle, but the fact that there's four different types, photoautotrophic, chemoautotrophic, heterotrophic, and chemo-heterotrophic. And so they're all using different things for energy, whether it's sunlight or CO2 or elemental know, and they're all doing different carbon sources. And so they're getting energy and they're getting carbon, but they've determined four different life strategies. There's one organism to do that. And again, that just leads to that kind of evolutionary thought process. You know, here's all these different life processes out of this one thing. And so it is kind of easy to see how that could, you know, evolve into these higher life forms. He talks about, again, they're extremophiles. They're found in hot springs, salt lakes. They have specialized enzymes so they can work at really high and low temperatures. He gets into some of the potential medical benefits of that. There's a lot that are able to be anaerobic. There's acidophiles. So they can have really acidic environments. There's halophiles, which are the salt lovers and can be in incredibly salty environments. And then there's archaea that thrive under the glaciers, so they can be in incredibly anaerobic, cold environments. And so, again, it's really amazing the diversity of life strategies that they have. A lot of them, one of the things that's distinctive about them that they have in common is that they're, I'm going to choke on this word, but methanogens, just they produce methane as part of their regular metabolic activity. And the kind of the important thing I think about that is that it's an ocean plankton. And so it's, this is probably the most abundant life form on earth. And if it's making a lot of methogen, methane, that's, that's something for us as humans to consider with greenhouse gases and that sort of stuff um at the at the end of that little section he talks about the the fact that these extremophiles and they have all these different um enzymes and physical changes morphologies so that they can exist in these really intense environments. If we're able to find those out, and I don't think we should, you know, well, it's not really, my opinion is not important on GMOs, but if we could find something that would allow a human to tolerate more heat or, you know, cattle to tolerate more heat or a crop to tolerate more heat, that that would be a really, you know, potentially beneficial thing, especially as we face these future climate challenges. He talks about the nitrogen cycle and how they're able to oxidize ammonia. The dominance of archaea. He goes into that as far as how, you know, we really thought it was bacteria, but it's like 3000 times more. I don't know, productive maybe is the right word, but it probably is like doing 3,000 times. It's more prevalent than bacteria in the soil as far as nitrogen fixation. That's something that, you know, that's something we didn't know. We thought it was bacteria and people gave lectures that it was bacteria. And now we know that it's archaea. And because we have these better scientific technologies, we know that. So that's just a really good reminder that we really don't know anything, no matter how confident we are about it. We don't know because we only know what we know. And there's another layer. There's another layer to the onion all the time. And so just that's great for us to remember to keep an open mind. And it's great for us to remember that there's always more research that can be done. He talks about their role as decomposers. Some interesting, you know, like they can oxidize sulfur compounds. That's beneficial for us as growers. You know, fortunately, the EPA has cleaned up a lot of the sulfur emissions to the point where a lot of soils are deficient. So, you know, we're not at a point where, or to my knowledge, I would, I should say, we're not at a point to my knowledge that we can really harness specific archaea and use them kind of like we use a mammoth pea, you know, maybe, maybe there's a sulfur solubilizing archaea that somebody could grow in a lab, but I'm not aware of it at this point. But it's interesting to think about that. We're here in Washington with Mount St. Helens looking over us. You'll find some of these sulfur metabolizing compounds there, anywhere there's volcanic, you know, activity. So he talks a little bit more about methane, how it's more efficient than trapping CO2. And just, you know, if 10 to 25% of the methane emissions are coming from methogenic archaea, then that's something that, you know, biologists, scientists, I almost said Scientologists, Scientologists should know this too. But, you know, folks that are studying our environment, this is something they should be aware of. I'll throw my headphones. We're trying to face some of these changes that we're looking at globally. Being aware of what the actual players are is important. Talks about how with the hypoxic areas, like where river mouths are and that kind of stuff where we're seeing these oxygen dead zones, especially like in the summertime in the Southeast. I just moved from South Carolina, so I'm real aware of, you know, they close down the beaches in Florida, South Carolina, Georgia, Louisiana, Texas. They get these red tides, uses up all the oxygen. But what shows up, the archaea does. He talks about the fact that because archaea is different from bacteria, they're able to produce a completely different type of antibiotic. And so I kind of think of it in IPM terms. It's a different MOA. It's a different mode of action. And so some of these things where we have over-prescribed or over-used or improperly used antibiotics to where we were starting to have antibiotic resistance, this could be an answer to that. We could tackle some of those things. That's really interesting. If we're able to, they're already taking advantage of the, some of these specialized enzymes that are, you know, for cloning DNA and other things that need to happen at really high temperature. Talks about sewage treatments using archaea for purification. And then he goes on and talks a little bit about just mutual relationships that are like everything else can form in the soil. So there we go. But so the big takeaway is that we can't really control archaea. We can't really harness it as growers, but it's something that we should be aware of. And it really, you know, for practical purposes, I still lump it in with bacteria, you know, and maybe that's just my age. And this information wasn't around when I was young and studying this stuff. But I think just for practicality, it makes sense to kind of lump it in with bacteria. Does anybody have any questions about archaea? This is a pretty short chapter, but fungi is chapter five. And I feel like that really deserves its own meeting. And I would expect there to be a lot of engagement and You can find them in the ocean and plankton. They're fairly ubiquitous. I would, yeah. I mean, unless you've got some super special weird backyard. But probably even then, they're highly whole the really thing the thing that's so cool about them to me is just the the diversity of life strategies and that they have so well that was the where they originally found them. And then... Yeah, so that was the whole thing about looking at them in the soil for the nitrogen fixation. They thought it was bacteria, and then they, you know, DNA sequencing that they were finding that it was archaea that was in that soil as opposed to bacteria that was doing the nitrogen fixation or the bulk of it. Yeah, they're everywhere, Margaret. It's a little confusing, but we thought they were only extremophiles, but they're really everywhere. And as far as cultivation is concerned, just think of them as bacteria. Yeah, but you'll find them in pretty much any soil. Anywhere where you'll find bacteria, you'll find them. And pretty much anywhere where you won't find bacteria, you'll find them too. I think that somebody could do that. I'm not aware of any, you know, I don't think anybody's done the research to isolate a strain of archaea and reproduce it in the lab. But in the same way that we're, you know, doing that with bacteria for phosphorus, you know, and sulfur and calcium, I think that, you know, somebody would be able to do that. I just don't think it's available right now, but I could, I could be totally wrong. It could be a product out there. Uh-huh. the oxygen and you could get anaerobic archaea to potentially break all that matter down and essentially clean it up. I think it's still off in the future. It's such a new thing that I don't think there's been a lot of research with it yet. I think they're just trying to figure out what it is. I researched this a while back, a few years ago. There was a local company that actually was working with an Archaea species that they had harvested from the Yellowstone vents or geysers that they claimed had these nutrient cycling properties and had cultivation benefits. We set up a trial at Goldleaf when Ben first started there. It never really took off. I don't know if it was because they didn't see differences, but they insisted on doing the applications themselves, like coming down and monitoring and applying everything. And I think they got busy and just stopped doing it. And so we never got the results from it. So I don't know if they're still around. They were more interested in agriculture at the time. But when we mentioned cannabis, they're like, yeah, we'd love to set up a trial because there's no research on this. And then it just never went anywhere. But yeah, so I, I guess I would say I have heard of a company that's doing it. But I don't remember. I could find out who it was. Yeah, they weren't using it for algal blooms or anything like that. It was specifically for cultivation. It was like a bacillus species. It's essentially only... It happened to be an archaea that they'd gotten from Yellowstone. It is cool. Yeah. Something else. Go ahead. this happening, an insect that's been completely, you know, consumed by a fungus. And then they, they culture it out. They discover if it's commercially viable and, um, you know, then that strain becomes the one that they manufacture. It's not to say it's the best strain that nature's ever come up with for dealing with, you know, it's not the best trichoderma, the best Bavaria, but it's the best one that humans have discovered for whatever target pest we're dealing with or whatever. So that's really interesting to me. So all these companies have patents on them, actually. So the Bavaria from one company is different from the Bavaria from another company. And, you know, the mycorrhizae from Dynamico, for example, is out of Israel from a very arid environment, whereas the one from Wallace Wonder, for example, is a North American strain. Yeah, it's just, it's interesting. Well, the original inventor is Mother Nature, and then it's just a human just discovered it. So the original discoverer, I guess. No, it's crazy what we can and cannot patent in the world right now. I don't know. Well, it's also really interesting that to this date, we don't know any pathogenic archaea, which is interesting to me as well. Yeah, so that opens it up to more medicinal potential. Maybe it hasn't met us yet. Yeah. Well, it's not just a harsh environment thing, though, Mark. That's the whole thing is it was discovered as just people were shocked that there was something alive there. But really, it's like it's in the soil under your feet. Like we just didn't know it. Yeah, because otherwise you could say if it only grew in those environments, you could say that, well, maybe it's not pathogenic for whatever reason. Maybe it's not pathogenic just because it hasn't had exposure to a mammal yet. Because things tend to, things that evolve together tend to eat each other. Well, keep in mind too, guys, we're talking about an entire kingdom. So it's not just one species that lives in deep sea vents or the same species that you would find in our soil. They're probably very different species. It's like talking about all mammals and trying to make only this is an entire kingdom. Mammals is obviously very specific. I think it's a family. I don't even know what classification we're at at that point. Just to give you an idea of the vast diversity within the Archaic Kingdom, I think it'd be very hard to draw a lot of conclusions beyond what Jeff does in his book. Yeah. If that makes sense. Well, it's supposed to be the most populous. And so therefore, theoretically, it could be the most diverse. It's so literal, you know, it's hard to know. And somebody would actually have to go through and DNA sequence every single thing on their slide to see if, was bacteria or archaea. Yeah. But it's really fascinating. And I think it's really cool that it shows a potential link for all these things that are higher life forms, just easier to study. And some of the, you know, really interesting enzymes and things that, you know, could be really important for us medically down the road, you know, and, and, and could be important for us environmentally, um, all kinds of potential impacts. But again, like Tad said, I'm just lumping in with bacteria. We're not going to make an archaea dominant tea, you know. I'm not. Maybe somebody will, but I'm not. Does anybody have any questions about Archaea or does anybody have any questions about, you know, anything else? Anybody want to talk about any other topics? I feel like we had a really good hangout the other night when Brian came on and talked genetics. That was a lot of fun. Yeah, we could you could stop recording, Brandon Brandon. If anyone wants to stick around and talk about another topic, we could. But as far as book club goes, I think this is just a fast chapter. Recording stopped. Yeah, it's a fast chapter. And Tad and I had talked about it previously. Should we add fungi on on here but i just feel like people are going to have a lot more questions and that's that's a topic that a lot of people like to go a little deeper on the on the radical there yeah well maybe that was it anyway okay well we Well, we can break for dinner if everybody's good. But I got to ask, hi, guy, if you've got squirrels. Not yet. I haven't gotten any yet. I think they got under my siding. I've been waiting for it to come back. I saw the brake barrel. I was like, oh, I know what that's for. That's fun. It's really accurate. At the Flower and Garden show for years, they were selling these things called pocket squirrels or something. They were real cute. I looked into them, but they require a ton of care. Was it like a shirtless glider? Yeah, that's exactly what it was. It was cute because it's the little red squirrels that break into your house. All the other ones are fine. Not chipmunks, but the red squirrels. They're smaller than the gray and black ones and stuff like that. They got into my attic before. They broke up my roof. It cost like $11,000 in damage to the house. Oh, jeez. You can't poison them because they can throw up. Right. I put a backstop down there and a peanut butter trap and I just wait for them to go there. We had squirrels in Colorado and they ate the heads of all my sunflowers. I had like 20 sunflowers and I went out and they just beheaded all of them. And they were blazingly sitting up in a tree with a head of one just eating the... They're so rude. They're just so rude. I have a black walnut tree here and when I go down into the yard where it's underneath that, they'll start dropping them. That's funny. They're mean. I had a really prophetic, horrible first date with this girl who had sugar gliders. It was my first time going over to her apartment. She shows me her sugar gliders. We go out. We came back. She was like, let's go check on the sugar gliders. And the female had eaten the male's throat and internal organs out. And I should have known right then and there, like, I should call this off. But I didn't. So that's my fault for not watching the signs. You know, if you're asking for a sign and you get one and you don't follow it, that's your fault. Yeah. But yeah, it's never been a clear sign in my life and I totally ignored it. No way, Brian. As a younger man, there's pretty much nothing at that point that would be a red flag if you think you have an in with a cute girl. Yeah. You look past a lot. Well, this is the first person I had gone out with after a disastrous first marriage. I got married really young to a woman who turned out to be gay. And so I, I, she, yeah, she could, she could have done a lot. She could have done a lot of bad stuff. Yeah. But yeah, the sugar glider was a, I should have paid attention. I'm glad we didn't record that. I was with a girl one time. I tried to litter box train.